.TH SPIN-FM 1 "19 July 2026" "Spin FM 2.6.21" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
spin-fm \- lightweight tabbed file manager for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spin-fm
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ path-or-file-uri ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Spin FM browses local files in a tabbed Qt interface. Folder arguments open in tabs. File arguments reveal the file in its parent folder. Local file:// URIs are accepted.
.PP
Copy, move, delete, Trash, storage-discovery, and removable-device commands are performed outside the graphical interface thread.
.PP
Single-clicking selects an item, places its complete path in the location bar, and asynchronously shows file size or recursive folder-content size, modification time, and MIME information in a persistent status field. The independent module connects each real file view through its native clicked signal, binds future tabs once, cancels stale folder scans, and retains only one running and one latest pending inspection. Double-clicking, pressing Return, or pressing keypad Enter activates the item. Activating a supported audio file opens the built-in player. Playback supports common formats such as MP3, Ogg/Vorbis, Opus, FLAC, WAV, and M4A when the installed Qt Multimedia backend provides the required codec.
.PP
The player provides a click-or-drag timeline, keyboard and mouse-wheel seeking, 10-second rewind and forward controls, mute, persistent volume, and desktop-player fallback. Seeking controls are disabled for streams that do not expose a seekable duration.
.PP
While a track is loaded, Spin FM exposes an MPRIS 2 player on the user session bus. Playerctl, desktop media keys, and compatible OSD services can query metadata and control play, pause, stop, seeking, and volume. Missing D-Bus support is non-fatal.
.PP
File and folder names wrap in the icon view so complete names remain visible. The Trash toolbar opens Home Trash directly when it is the only location, or a large full-path chooser when mounted-volume Trash folders are available. File > Empty Trash uses GIO to empty the desktop Trash, including supported mounted-volume Trash locations. Delete moves ordinary items to Trash and permanently removes items already inside a recognized Trash payload directory.
.PP
Dropping local files or folders onto a folder asks for confirmation and then moves them using the same safety checks as Cut and Paste. Existing same-name destinations always require an explicit overwrite or skip decision.
.PP
When Wayland_OSD is available in a Wayland session, Spin FM can display best-effort media, seek, and player-volume feedback through its local socket. Detection accepts an installed executable or a live Unix socket and is rechecked whenever feedback is requested. Ordinary files, stale sockets, startup failures, and protocol errors do not interrupt playback.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR --log-level " " LEVEL
Set logging to DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, or CRITICAL.
.TP
.BR --version
Print the Spin FM version and exit.
.TP
.BR -h , " " --help
Show command-line help and exit.
.SH KEYBOARD
.TP
.B Alt+P
Play or pause the embedded audio player, publish the accepted MPRIS state, and request Wayland_OSD feedback when available.
.TP
.B Alt+M
Mute or unmute the embedded audio player and request Wayland_OSD feedback when available.
.TP
.B Ctrl+Up
Open the parent folder.
.TP
.B Ctrl+T / Ctrl+W
Open a new tab / close the current tab.
.TP
.B Ctrl+L
Focus the location bar.
.TP
.B F5 or Ctrl+R
Refresh the current folder.
.TP
.B F9
Show or hide the removable-device panel. Spin FM remembers a bounded panel width that keeps Mount and Unmount actions visible.
.TP
.B Return or keypad Enter
Open the selected folder or file.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_LOG_LEVEL
Default logging level when --log-level is not supplied.
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_NATIVE_STYLE
Set to 1, true, or yes to keep the desktop's native Qt style instead of Fusion.
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_FILE_INFO
Set to 0, false, no, or off to disable the independent selected-file information integration for troubleshooting.
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_WAYLAND_OSD
Set to 0, false, no, off, or disabled to turn off optional Wayland_OSD integration. Set to force or always to permit detection outside an identified Wayland session.
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_WAYLAND_OSD_COMMAND
Override the Wayland_OSD executable name or path. The default is wayland-volume-osd.
.TP
.B SPIN_FM_WAYLAND_OSD_THEME
Override the detected Wayland_OSD theme with dark, blue, grey, or wood.
.SH APPEARANCE
Adwaita is used as the first-run icon theme when installed. Other installed icon themes can be selected from the Appearance menu.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/Spin/Spin FM.conf
Persistent application settings (exact suffix can vary by Qt backend).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/Trash/
Freedesktop Trash location used by the fallback Trash implementation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR playerctl (1),
.BR xdg-open (1),
.BR udisksctl (1),
.BR lsblk (8)
.SH AUTHOR
JJ Posti.
.SH LICENSE
GNU General Public License version 2 or later.
